Bayly: India in The Eighteenth Century: The Formation of States and Social Groups

Mughal Dynasty consolidated in the second half of the 16th century under Akbar
Hindu Kingdoms around the Vijayangar kingdom taken over various Hindu warrior chieftains
Under Aurangzeb 1658-1707 Dehli still balled pretty hard.
Last Muslim kingdom defeated in the Deccan in the 1680s.
Some questions as to weather the Mughal empire was ever a centralized state
Brits considered Mughals to be quite powerful.
By the beginning of the 18th century, the outlook wasn't too good for the Mughals
Marathas, Sikhs, etc. start fucking with their shit.
Decreasing land revenues
Incursion from Nadir Shah to the west.
Awadh, Bengal, Deccan centers of power began to emerge as the grip of Delhi loosened (This is perhaps due to the overextention of military power, and an ill placed trust in outer provinces by delhi. Not that they ever really had a choice.)
acceleration of decline after this point. Loose your loyalty, loose it all homie. got to protect ya neck.
Britain Takes Bengal 2: Hot City Nights
Oh also that little vital trading port called Surat. That little thing. The British took that too. Lil bit.
1784, the Mughal emporer accepted the "Protection" of Mahadji Scindia (Maratha), but this came to an end when Britain destroyed some serious mountain forts, etc. and defeated the Marathas in 1803. After this, the Mughal emporer was more of a figurehead, 'tinsel sovreign' as Bayly puts it.
Learned men, Muslim poets, etc were shocked by this decline.
Perhaps not neccisarily a decline in mughal power, but rather an ascent of minority social groups. (perhaps we'll steer clear of this for the moment)
Revenue Farmers began to take on new prominence
Hindus of Commercial Castes
Moneylending classes.
Perhaps we may view the decline of delhi as an incursion of the coasts? The importance of military power was not neccesarily diminished, but rather the importance of the commercial classes becomes more important. The opening of India to the world creates a rising tide of capital, but it flows inward, being lent to the nobles that once provided capital to the merchants. Perhaps with the wave of merchants, the tide changed. 
It may be useful to think about the subcontinent as a system of pressure locations, forever fluctuating and equilibrating, but there is simply a large fracturing of that power at a center that was large enough to create rifts across the entire subcontinent.
"consolidation of features" of elite parties in india during the period.
This enabled much of the landed class to enjoy powers that they were once denied. Zamindars began to collect more of their own revenue- they were runnin that shit, but it's all in the game tho, right? Independantly of the British, though perhaps not without the indirect influence of their presence, there was an overturning of long-standing power structures in the subcontinent.
Increasing commercialization of the subcontinent under the mughals meant more of the aforementioned changes in power structure. Suddenly, the purse mattered as much, as military prowess. Money can buy something that no amount of soldiers or artillery could ever buy: stability and the influence to stabilize and consolidate. With the incursion of moneyed interests into the subcontinent, there was a reversal of the flow of cash, and the almighty rupee began to break down all that the Mughals has worked to consolidate. Overstretched and exhausted by pressure on all sides, they collapsed not with a bang, but a whimper in the mid 19th century, as the last vestiges of power were erased by the newly installed Raj.
"Yet at the same time Mughal decline was itself the result of the creation of new wealth and social power in the provinces where it could not easily be controlled by the distant monarch in Delhi. It was, after all, many of the areas and groups which had been most successful in the seventeenth century who revolted against or surreptitiously withdrew from under the Mughal umbrella in the eighteenth." 
Take for example, Awadh (or Oudh, as it appears in many historical texts), often known as "The granary of India" Awadh's strategic location along the Yamuna, and fertile climate allowed it some degree of independence as it distinguished itself from its former Mughal influence.

Something something caste structure isn't all that it seems, like it's so complex and such... all these grey areas, etc.
Bhosles 'n' stuff- whatever.
Agrarian societies and all that.
"Commericalization and group formation"
There are, of course, doubts about how much the Mughal empire held absolute influence within the subcontinent. Bayly brings up the idea that the Mughal kind was the Shah-an-Shah or King of Kings within the Mughal realm.
"He was a marshal of kings, an entrepreneur in power. His tools were at once the siege train and the royal honours given out at the great assemblies (darbars)