"Was the 18th century a period of decline in India? Did the "fall" of the mughal empire hurl India into a period of political, economic, or cultural chaos? Or, are there alternative ways of regarding Indian conditions during this period?

The answer to this question (as to whether India was in a period of decline) is a heavily qualified "No." due to the fact that there were many geographic areas in play during the century. Let's list a few primary ones:

Bengal (Britain/EIC)
Delhi
Maratha-held territories
Surat, and that fun stuff
Awadh
Sikh Territories
The South

We should begin by addressing the transition from Mughal power. The fracturing of power in the overextended empire led to the rise of several local authorities gaining prominence. (See: Awadh) Pressure from the Marathas and British helped to concentrate military power to be relatively inneffective in other regions of control.

The basic answer to all of this is that "it depends". It depends mainly on your particular position in the grand scheme of empires, social groups, etc. Bayly makes a large point of this. Certainly if you were an upper level Mughal ruler things wouldn't have looked so rosy, but were you an administrative official on a more local or regional level, your fortunes may have been flipped somewhat. Of course, were you to start shit with the british toward the middle-end of the century, you might find yourself on the wrong end of a good amount of artillary. This cannot be ignored. It is important, however, to remember that the 18th century was a period of mostly commercial interest for the EIC, with the bottom line taking precedence over any governmental concerns. It was only into the late 18th and early 19th century that the concerns turned toward the the management of power in the controlled regions (not that it wasn't before). This was brought on by a number of factors, primarily changes in Britain. The industrial revolution in Britain had created a flood of cheap manufactured goods that rendered some of the previously imported artisinal goods unprofitable (and later rendered many Indian-produced goods uncompetitive in their own market; see: swadeshi movmt. etc...)

The end of the 18th century also brought many changes in policy surrounding traditional means of land management and revenue collection, etc. This was most prevalent in the administration of Bengal, though other territories got to keep their structures of power to a larger extent. Some of this paralleled the liberal reforms taking place in Britain at the time. The various readings may help with this immensely. Armitage, P.J. Marshall, Alavi- etc.

Talk about some poets like Ghalib, etc.
